good morning again from the Senate
caucus room a former CI a super spy
James Angleton good morning again from
the Senate caucus room a former CI a
super spy James angleton is to be the
whole show before the committee this
morning
I'm Jim Lara with impact correspondent
she's shown a rather interesting
propensity to begin on time as what we
are beginning actually on how to order
yesterday the committee commenced its
inquiry into the Houston plan our
witness being mr. Houston
and it developed in the testimony that
several illegal proposals had been made
to the president in this case mr. Nixon
that he had approved those proposals
later had revoked his approval but that
the very activities for which his
authority was sought I had in fact had
been going on for a long period of time
prior to the submission of the proposals
to the president the evidence also
showed that once the president had
revoked the proposals about five days
after he had first approved them the
activity has nevertheless continued and
in some cases were expanded mr. Huston
testified that mr. Nixon was not aware
of these activities either before or
after
his approval and revocation
one of the illegal activities was the
opening of the mail by the CIA and this
committee will look into that mail
opening program the evidence also showed
that once the President had revoked the
proposal about five days after he had
first approved them the activity has
nevertheless continued and in some cases
were expanded mr. Houston testified that
mr. Nixon was not aware of these
activities either before or after his
approval line revocation
one of the illegal activities was the
opening of the mail by the CIA and this
committee will look into that mail
opening program extensively it's a very
serious matter and we have hearing
scheduled a few weeks from now and into
which we will inquire in detail about
the mail opening program
we want to know for example why the mail
of such individuals and organizations in
this country as the Ford Foundation
Harvard University the Rockefeller
Foundation was regularly opened by the
CIA or the mail coming to or from such
individuals as Arthur burns Bela Abzug
Jay Rockefeller Martin Luther King mrs.
Martin Luther King Richard Nixon himself
as well as such senators as Hubert
Humphrey
Edward Kennedy even the chairman of this
committee whose letter to my mother is
in the file should have been regularly
opened and scrutinized by the CIA
against the laws of the country and so
today our objective is is not to look at
this mail program in great detail for we
will do that later but it is rather to
examine the lack of accountability
within the agency and the failure to
keep the President of the United States
properly advised of such activities a
core issue if we are going to reform the
intelligence agencies and law
enforcement agencies of the federal
government and make them properly
responsible a to and accountable for
their actions to the elected
representatives of the people
chief among whom of course is the
president himself now forces the
President himself now with that brief
introduction to the general topic for
the day I would like to ask our witness
mr. Angleton who I understand is
represented by counsel to take the oath
before I ask you to take the oath mr.
Angleton I wonder if your attorney would
identify himself for the record yes mr.
chairman my name is John T Brown counsel
for mr. Angleton in these proceedings
Thank You mr. Brown mr. angleton would
you please stand and take the oath
you solemnly swear that all the
testimony we'll give in this proceeding
will be the truth the whole truth and
nothing but the truth so help you God
mr. Schwartz would you please mr.
Schwartz
will you please begin the questioning
mr. Angleton were you employed by the
CIA in 1970 yes sibylla's can you keep
your voice up it's hard to hear you
yes I was what was your job at that time
I wasn't changing the convert
intelligence fell and when did you start
working for the CIA
I began when in 1947 hadn't come from
the OSS you knew mr. angleton did you
not that the CIA was opening mail in New
York City in 1970 and had been doing so
for approximately 15 or 20 years I
pardon me if I may interrupt for just a
moment as I indicated the counsel for
the committee mr. Anglophone had a very
brief opening statement which he wished
to make and I would like to get this
time to ask for the opportunity to have
him make that statement if I may yes I'm
sorry you didn't say that to me and I'm
very sorry go ahead
mr. Shah members of the committee my
name is James angleton I'm appearing
before the committee today truly without
subpoena I'm mindful of the serious
issues facing the committee and I know
of your concern that they be resolved
prudently and expeditiously I have
served in the intelligence community
United States for 31 years beginning
with the OSS during World War two in
1954 I began chief the current tugs
activities of CIA a position which I
held until 1974 I am now retired my
years of service have convinced me that
the strength of the United States lies
in his capacity to sustain perpetual a
peaceful revolution it is the ultimate
function of the intelligence community
as part of our government to maintain
and enhance the opportunity for peaceful
change I believe most strongly that the
efforts and motivations of the
intelligence community have contributed
to the sustaining of a nation of
diversity and strength thank you mr.
chairman thank you my friend again
Stranglers thank you miss rather be
strengthened if we could just get back
to where we were
you just said did you not that you knew
in 1970 and had known her a substantial
period of time that the CIA was opening
mail in New York City that was correct
and director Helms knew that did he not
that was correct
and J Edgar Hoover head of the FBI knew
that did he not I would assume so sir
I'll read to you what mr. helm said in
his deposition of last week quotes mr.
Hoover knew all about the mail
operations close quotes now you've no
reason to doubt that do you and mr.
Sullivan of the FBI knew all about the
CIA's
opening program did he not that is
correct now mr. Helms and mr. Hoover and
mr. Sullivan and yourself were all
involved in the process which has come
to be known as the Houston plan is that
correct that is correct and mr. Helms
and mr. Hoover signed the plan did they
not they did and mr. Sullivan was the
primary drafter but you and other
working persons contributed to the
drafting of the report did you not
correctly write would you turn mr.
Angleton to page 29 of the special
report interagency committee on
intelligence ad hoc June 1970
now that's talking about mail coverage
isn't it that is correct and it
distinguishes between routine coverage
and covert coverage saying routine
coverage is legal and covert coverage is
illegal is that correct that is correct
and by covert coverage they meant
opening the mail did they not sick would
you read into the record the first
sentence under the heading nature of
restrictions please
covert coverage has been discontinued
while routine coverage has been reduced
primarily as an outgrowth of publicity
arising from disclosure routine mail
coverage during legal proceedings and
publicity afforded this moderate and
congressional hearings involving
accusations of governmental invasion of
privacy the first five words say covert
coverage has privacy the first five
words say covert coverage has been
discontinued and as you just agreed a
moment ago that states that the opening
of mail has been discontinued isn't that
right mat 6 a little clarification
please I believe that if you read the
contribution under preliminary
discussion that is dealing that the
we're faced with two problems were faced
with the problem of domestic mail that
goes from one point in the United States
to another point United States the CIA
activity CIA activity was devoted from
mail from the United States to communist
countries and from communist countries
the United States so there's two degrees
of opening in other words the entire
intent
and motivation of the programs conducted
by CIA and though the question of
foreign entanglements encountered
intelligence objectives the domestic
mail program was a program that had been
conducted at some time another by the
FBI
mr. angleton which answered my question
the words covert coverage has been
discontinued covert there means opening
mail isn't that right that is correct
okay and I will read to you from the
prior paragraph a reference which makes
perfectly clear that the committee was
talking about both foreign and domestic
he was talking about both foreign and
domestic
mr. angleton would answer my question
the words covert coverage has been
discontinued covert there means opening
mail isn't that right that is correct
okay and I will read to you from the
prior paragraph a reference which makes
perfectly clear that the committee was
talking about both foreign and domestic
mail the sentence which says the
following covert mail coverage also
known as sophisticated mail coverage or
flaps and seals entails syrup tisha
screening and may include opening an
examination of domestic or foreign mail
now
the sentence which says covert coverage
has been discontinued that's a lie
that's false as far as your knowledge
mr. Hoover's knowledge mr. Helms's
knowledge and mr. Sullivan's knowledge
isn't that correct
it is still my impression mr. Schwarz
that this activity this room referred to
as having been discontinued refers to
the bureau's activities in this field
well the words don't say that number one
number two how would a reader of these
words have any idea that that
distinction was being drawn strenghten
was cement my impression that this was
the gap which the Bureau was seeking to
cure all right perfectly clear what
we're talking about you knew mr. Helms
knew mr. Hoover knew and mr. Sullivan
knew that the CIA was in fact opening
the mail and the sentence says covert
coverage which means mail opening has
been discontinued but I still say that
the FBI in my view who are the ones who
made the contribution of that stove was
covering the problems that they have had
and discontinuing them that bear mail
coverage mr. Helms signed the report
didn't he that is correct
right I just want to have you read into
the record from this quick right I just
want to have you read into the record
from two more documents which relate to
the Attorney General of the United
States being informed about mail opening
but being informed in June 1971 or in
other words a year after the Houston
plan would you first read into the
record
from the brown book tab J paragraph four
of that document and while you're
looking for it I will identify for the
record that that is a CIA memorandum for
the record dated May 19 1971 subject GC
eyes meeting concerning HT lingual which
was the codename for the male opening
programmer and it refers mister Angleton
to a meeting and Mister Helms's office
which involved a number of CIA officials
including yourself would you read into
the record paragraph four please it's
the first page tender of tab J and
Randall now I read it to myself first
please
yes paragraph for the DCI meaning the
director of Central Intelligence then
ask who in the post office Department
knows the full extent of the operation
beyond cover surveillance the chief
counterintelligence man myself
you lied that only mr. Carter knows
where he has been wedding well with the
CIA and the office of security the
previous chief post inspector mr.
Montague had never wanted to know the
extent of examination actually done and
thus was able to deny on oath before
congressional committee that there was
any tampering
mr. Carter would be unable to make such
a denial under oath in exchange between
the director Central Intelligence and
the director of plans Deputy Director
for plans it was observed that while mr.
Carter's loyal lead to CIA could be
assumed his dilemma is that he owes
lowly now to the Postmaster General
right now because of that dilemma in
other words for the first time someone
was in the post office department that
for sure knew that the mail was being
opening being opened because of that
dilemma mr. Hellmuth went to see the
Attorney General did he not this crew
right would you
this could alright would you now read
into the record from the memorandum for
the record 3 June 1971 which senators at
Tab K subject meeting at DC eyes office
concerning HT lingual dated as I said
June 3rd 1971 would you read into the
record the second paragraph which refers
to mr. Helms's statement that he had
breathed the Attorney General concerning
the mail opening program paragraph 2 mr.
Holmes stated that on Monday had break
the Attorney General Mitchell on the
operation parentheses note mr. Helms may
have meant to Z 1 June Mundy hadn't been
a holiday mr. Helms indicated that mr.
Mitchell fully concurred in the value of
the operation and had no quote hang-ups
concerning it when discussing the
advisability of also briefing Postmaster
General Blanc mr. Mitchell encouraged
mr. Helms to undertake such a briefing
right now that document was dated June
3rd 1971 and the mail opening program
lasted until January or February 1973
when at the instance of mr. Colby who
said it was illegal it was dropped is
that correct that is correct it was
actually the director wasn't mr.
Schlesinger and was it not mr. Colby who
who was the moving force saying it was
his session okay no further questions
chairman
with triangle Tintin strangled in you
heard mr. Houston's testimony yesterday
mostly sure but you will remember then
that he represented to the committee
that in response to the president's
desire to extend the intelligence
coverage within this country that
he asked the various departments of the
government involved the FBI the CIA the
NSA to come together with a plan to give
the president some options and that the
purpose of the recommendations that were
made to the president in the so-called
Houston plan based upon the
recommendations that had come from these
departments was to secure the
president's authorization to eliminate
restrictions that he felt were
obstructing this
gathering of intelligence now
mr. Houston told us that he was never
informed by the CIA the FBI or any
agency but the mail was being open
he made a recommendation to the
president the president authorized mail
openings and he testified that to his
knowledge the president didn't know that
the mail was being opened either now
when we asked mr. Helms the director of
the CIA if to his knowledge the
president had been told of the mail
openings he said I do not know whether
he knew it or not so the state of the
record is that the best of our knowledge
the president had not been told that the
mail was being opened
he gets a recommendation in which it is
represented the covert coverage which
his mail openings have been discontinued
and he's asked to authorize the
reopening of this program now you have
referred to the President as the
commander in chief
what possible justification was there to
misrepresent a matter of such importance
to the commander-in-chief I would say
that your question is very well public
mr. chairman I can only speculate and I
do not have any record of the
discussions between ourselves and the
FBI during the drafting stages but I
know we had several were matters tabled
within the drafting committee were
matters that we never explained to the
other members and one of them of course
was the male intercept again only by
whether speculation I believe what the
person had approved or even if there
have been some access to the president
because I think there's a part of the
most difficult task of all was to have
the audience in which these things could
be explained I have more satisfactory
answer to your question except that I
believe that a great deal of the male
problem centered on the bureau's lack of
coverage not the education
but the CIA was the agency principally
involved in the mail opening it is
correct for our part yes mail not for
domestic yes and we will we will explore
the whole breadth of that program in due
course didn't the CIA having an
affirmative duty to inform the president
about such a program
I believe so without any question but it
apparently was not done you you did not
inform the president - director Helms
did not inform the president so I would
say sir not by way of any excuse but
those are very turbulent periods for the
intelligence community
and particularly for the FBI and I think
that all of us had enormous respect for
mr. Hoover and understood the problems
which he had in sustaining the
reputation of the FBI but the fact that
the times were turbulent the fact that
illegal operations were being conducted
by the very agencies we entrust to
uphold and enforce the law makes it all
the more incumbent that the president be
informed of what's going on doesn't it
it's really not an excuse I don't think
there was every form in which these
matters could be raised at that level I
think it's been one of the troubles on
domestic counterintelligence and foreign
counterintelligence that the issue never
do
on the parochial circle of those engaged
in that activity but you have said that
there was an affirmative duty on the CIA
that you have said that there was an
affirmative duty on the CIA to inform
the president I don't dispute it and he
was not informed but I saw that little
mayor that was a failure of duty the
commander in chief is that correct mr.
Chairman I don't think anyone would have
hesitated to inform the president if he
had any moment as for a review of
intelligence operations well that's what
he did do that's the very thing he asked
Houston to do that's the very reason
that these agencies got together to make
recommendations to him and when they
made their recommendations they
misrepresented the facts I was referring
sir to but I regret more restricted
forum I'm referring to the mail and what
I have said is solidly based upon the
evidence the president wanted to be
informed he wanted recommendations he
wanted to decide what should be done and
he was misinformed not only was he
misinformed but when he reconsidered
authorizing the opening of the mail five
days later and revoked it the CIA didn't
pay the slightest bit of attention to
him did it the commander in chief as you
say I ever mention actually I have no
satisfactory answer to you have no
satisfactory and I
I don't think there is a satisfactory
answer because having revoked the
authority the CIA went right ahead with
his program so the commander in chief
isn't the commander chief tall he's just
a problem you don't want it you don't
want to inform him in the first place
because he might say no that's the truth
of it and when he did say no you
disregard it and then you call him the
commander in chief I have no further
questions
in a tower
and it's are the triangles in the role
of certain leaders then the intelligence
community such as mr. Helms have been of
concern to this committee
now referring back to your transcript of
September the 12 at page 17 you were
asked about the role of the director of
your agency role mr. Helms and you began
by discussing the first meeting of the
interagency committee now you were asked
who attended it and your response clause
and I read front of you so didn't
understand you asked who attended it and
your response was as follows and I read
directly from the transcript mr. Helms
but he attended only for a few moments
Houston made the opening remarks as I
recall and since it was being held in
our building Helms made a brief
appearance so to speak the host and he
took off and I don't think from that
moment he attended any other meetings
and this triangle term the question is
this is this still an accurate
characterization of mr. Helms
participation in the decisions and
recommendations leading up to the
so-called Houston plan what I didn't
mean my statement to indicate that there
was any neglect of duty was simply that
the working group were qualified to
adhere to certain guidelines
mr. Helms appearance of purse appearance
was to lend weight to the president's
request and to support mr. Houston are
you saying that mr. Helms made no
substantial contribution to the
substance of the report no it was I'm
speaking about the that his original
talk was only to outline what the
president required from the working
group and naturally I saw him from time
to time in terms of I would telephone
him to indicate where we stood on the
report mr. Anglin in these forty-hour
mr. Anglin in these working group
sessions who represented the FBI mr.
Sullivan sir who was also the chairman
in the working group and your opinion
did mr. Sullivan's use accurately
represent those of mr. Hoover no I do
not think so did you lab wait on that
mr. Sullivan as the chief of the
internal security assistant director
from Colonel security found himself
handicapped by lack of personnel and
funding in addition many of the
aggressive operations conducted by the
bureau in the past had been
systematically cut out by mr. Hoover
well what does that mean but significant
to that well the significance paying
that the production of the internal
security fell down considerably are miss
Franklin did you come to gain some
insight into the relation
ship between mr. Sullivan and mr. Tom
Charlie Houston well it was my
understanding sir that they had known
one another for over a year prior to the
meetings and I would suggest that mr.
Houston was much better educated when I
embarked on these matters and his
testimony suggests well I count them
extremely knowledgeable he was certain
the word are the gaps would you say that
mr. Houston reflected the views of mr.
Sullivan pardon would you say that mr.
Houston reflected the views of mr.
Sullivan very much so sir
I have no further questions mr. Mondale
Thank You senator Tower
for the question mr. Mondale thanks
senator Tower
mr. Angleton Neb you were in charge of
the covert mail cover program from the
beginning am i correct
not from the beginning sir from 1935 all
right after that on is an ongoing
operation which have been lug those for
the agency and what is your
understanding is who ought as to who
authorized the program I would say that
the operation that was first initiated
in 1952 it sums those who authorization
was from the chief of operations of the
clandestine services as you conducted
this program under whose authority was
that your understanding that you were
operating under with emergency yes under
Road chief of cumbersome operations the
deputy director for plans would that be
correct and for your purposes was that
considered adequate Authority or was
this such that you felt authority had to
flow from either the President or the
National Security Council
I believe that I regarded that plus the
authority from the director to listen
and prepare was knowledgeable of the
program as internal Authority and at
your level of operations that would be
the only authority you would concern
yourself with that is correct
what was your unturned yourself with
that is correct what was your
understanding of the legality of the
covert mail operation though it was
illegal but whether it was illegal that
it was illegal now you're an attorney no
I'm not sick well maybe that might be an
asset is my covering being lent myself I
shouldn't say that's my cover what how
do you rationalize conducting the
program which you believe to be illegal
to begin with I was taking it over as an
ongoing operation then there was
probability that the program through
lack of personnel and funding would have
been scrubbed at some stage from a
counterintelligence point of view we'll
believe that it was extremely important
to know everything possible regarding
contacts of American citizens with
communist countries had a second that we
believe that the security of the
operation was such to the suburbs were
unaware of such a program and therefore
that many of the interest the Saugus
would have
face subversive and otherwise would be
from Europe in males when their own
adjudication was that them those were
could not be violated so that a judgment
was made with which you concurred that
although covert mail openings were
illegal the good that flowed from it in
terms of anticipating threats to this
country through the use of this
counterintelligence technique made it
worthwhile nevertheless as correct them
shouldn't sue
you have something more not I'm sorry
you have something more non sorry howdy
how do you recommend that this committee
deal with this profound crisis between a
political and legal responsibility in
government a nation that believes in the
laws and what you regard to be the
counterintelligence imperative of
illegal activity what do we do about it
my own belief has always been that high
authority would it be on the hill the
Congress or am the executive need to
examine very closely the
counterintelligence content available to
this government regarding its
adversaries and regarding the Soviet and
the southern block to my knowledge there
has never been such an examination I
believe very much in a statement made by
director of the FBI mr. Kelly
that is his from the deal which you
expressed in Canada at a Bar Association
convention that certain individual
rights have to be sacrificed for the
national security you believe that
national security cannot be protected
except through the sacrifice of these
rights I believe that all matters doing
spinners require very sophisticated
handling and require considerable
latitude and who do you think should be
empowered to and who do you think should
be empowered to determine which rights
should be set aside I think that so the
expert in these matters that it should
be a combination the executive and the
Congress and how would the Congress
express itself traditionally it's
through the adoption of laws or how
would Congress make its views known
through the adoption of laws I'm afraid
I don't well as as I understand the
progression of this discussion it's your
opinion that this nation cannot protect
itself without setting aside certain
personal liberties and then I asked you
well who would determine what liberties
were to be set aside and you said it
should be a combination of the executive
in the Congress and of course the
Congress acts through laws are you
saying that we should take another look
at our laws to see whether they fully
meet the needs of national security that
is correct
well wouldn't it have been better then
when these laws were violated in the
past to do just that come to the
Congress and say in our opinion we can't
defend you under this present set of
laws and therefore we make these
recommendations for change but that
wasn't what was done surreptitiously and
privately and covertly illegal rights
the American people were violated in
this case opening a mail without any
such approval in the law that correct
do you think that was the correct way to
proceed but I think in my world doing
the pellets and I never seen one yet
that these matters should have been
brought up vigorously all through the
lifespan of the Central Intelligence
Agency I don't think there was a proper
forum here for the airing securely of
these matters
I disagree with you on the question of
national security
I think our Constitution provides plenty
of power to protect this country but in
any event I see no authority in anyone
in the executive or in the Congress or
anywhere else for determining on their
own that the law isn't good enough and
therefore taking it into their own hands
I see no way of conducting a civilized
democratic society with those kinds of
rules now in your system for covert
openings you there was prepared a
watchlist which set forth certain names
of organizations and purposes and those
names were the trigger for opening mail
to or from them in which were sent
internationally on the watchlist
to the Southern Union by to subunit on
the list included the Linus Pauling
John Steinbeck the author and Victor
Uther of the autoworkers
what den counterintelligence objective
was it thought you were achieving and
opening the mail what most of us would
assume to be very patriotic thoughtful
decent Americans he said I would prefer
that possible to respond to that
question in executive session well I'd
like the answer the Chairman is near so
I think we ought to pass that request up
until the Chairman is back I have
several other questions wrong